---
number: 13
slug: act-on-the-intentions-of-others-their-ulterior-and-superior
title_en: 'Act on the intentions of others: their ulterior and superior motives'
title_es: Obrar de intención, ya segunda, y ya primera
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*Act on the intentions of others: their ulterior and superior motives.* Man’s life on earth is a militia against malicia, or malice. Cunning arms itself with strategies of intention. It never does what it indicates. It takes aim deceptively, feints nonchalantly in the air, and delivers its blow, acting upon unforeseen reality with attentive dissimulation. To win the attention and conﬁdence of others, it hints at its intention. But immediately it turns against that intention and conquers through surprise. The penetrating intelligence heads oﬀ cunning with close observation, ambushes it with caution, understands the opposite of what cunning wanted it to understand, and immediately identiﬁes false intentions. Intelligence allows the ﬁrst intention to pass by, and awaits the second one, and even the third. Simulation grows even greater seeing that its guile has been penetrated, and tries to deceive by telling the truth. Changing strategies, it beguiles us with its apparent lack of guile. It bases its cunning on the greatest candor. But observation comes forward, sees through all this, and discovers the shadows that are cloaked in light. It deciphers intention, which is most hidden when most simple. Thus does the cunning of Python* struggle against the candor of the penetrating rays of Apollo.

---
> *The huge serpent killed by Apollo at the foot of Parnassus.

## Spanish

*Obrar de intención, ya segunda, y ya primera*. Milicia es la vida del hombre contra la malicia del hombre, pelea la sagazidad con estratagemas de intención. Nunca obra lo que indica, apunta, sí, para deslumbrar; amaga al aire con destreza y executa en la impensada realidad, atenta siempre a desmentir. Echa una intención para assegurarse de la émula atención, y rebuelve luego contra ella venciendo por lo impensado. Pero la penetrante inteligencia la previene con atenciones, la azecha con reflexas, entiende siempre lo contrario de lo que quiere que entienda, y conoce luego qualquier intentar de falso; dexa passar toda primera intención, y está en espera a la segunda y aun a la tercera. Augméntase la simulación al ver alcançado su artificio, y pretende engañar con la misma verdad: muda de juego por mudar de treta, y haze artificio del no artificio, fundando su astucia en la mayor candidez. Acude la observación intendiendo su perspicacia, y descubre las tinieblas revestidas de la luz; desçifra la intención, más solapada quanto más sencilla. Desta suerte combaten la calidez de Pitón contra la candidez de los penetrantes rayos de Apolo.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
