---
number: 15
slug: surround-yourself-with-auxiliary-wits
title_en: Surround yourself with auxiliary wits
title_es: Tener ingenios auxiliares
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*Surround yourself with auxiliary wits.* Things turn out well for the powerful when they are surrounded by people of great understanding who can get them out of the tight situations where their ignorance has placed them, and take their place in battling diﬃculty. It is singular greatness to use wise people: better than the barbaric taste of Tigranes,* who wanted to enslave the kings he conquered. This is a new way of mastering others, in what matters most in life: skillfully make servants of those whom nature made superior. We have little to live and much to know, and you cannot live if you do not know. It takes uncommon skill to study and learn without eﬀort: to study much through many, and know more than all of them together. Do this and you will go to a gathering and speak for many. You will speak for as many sages as counseled you, and will win fame as an oracle thanks to the sweat of others. Choose a subject, and let those around you serve up quintessential knowledge. If you can’t make knowledge your servant, make it your friend.

---
> *King of Armenia (ﬁrst century B.C.) who conquered Parthia and often appeared in public attended by the princes he had defeated.

## Spanish

*Tener ingenios auxiliares*. Felicidad de poderosos; acompañarse de valientes de entendimiento que le saquen de todo ignorante aprieto, que le riñan las pendencias de la dificultad. Singular grandeza servirse de sabios, y que excede al bárbaro gusto de Tigranes, aquel que afectava los rendidos Reyes para criados. Nuevo género de señorío, en lo mejor del vivir hazer siervos por arte de los que hizo la naturaleza superiores. Ai mucho que saber y es poco el vivir, y no se vive si no se sabe. Es, pues, singular destreza el estudiar sin que cueste, y mucho por muchos, sabiendo por todos. Dize después en un Consistorio por muchos, o por su voca hablan tantos sabios quantos le previnieron, consiguiendo el crédito de Oráculo a sudor ageno. Hazen aquéllos primero elección de la lición, y sírvenle después en quintas essencias el saber. Pero el que no pudiere alcançar a tener la sabiduría en servidumbre, lógrela en familiaridad.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
