---
number: 44
slug: sympathy-with-the-great
title_en: Sympathy with the great
title_es: Sympatía con los Grandes varones
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*Sympathy with the great.* One of the gifts of the hero is the ability to dwell with heroes. This ability, called sympathy, is a wonder of nature, both because it is so mysterious and because it is so beneﬁcial. There are similar hearts and temperaments, and the eﬀects of sympathy resemble those which vulgar ignorance attributes to magic potions. Not only can this sympathy help us win renown, it inclines others towards us and quickly wins their goodwill. It persuades without words, achieves without merit. There is active and passive sympathy,* and both kinds work wonders among people in high positions. It takes great skill to know them, distinguish between them, and take advantage of them. No amount of eﬀort can take the place of this mysterious favor.

---
> *Gracián’s meaning is not entirely clear. Romera-Navarro believes “active sympathy” is that which elicits similar feelings in others, and “passive” that which does not.

## Spanish

*Sympatía con los Grandes varones*. Prenda es de Héroe el convinar con Héroes: prodigio de la naturaleza por lo oculto y por lo ventajoso. Ai parentesco de coraçones, y de genios, y son sus efetos los que la ignorancia vulgar achaca bevediços. No para en sola estimación, que adelanta benevolencia, y aun llega a propensión: persuade sin palabras, y consigue sin méritos. Aila activa, y la ai pasiva; una y otra felizes, quanto más sublimes. Gran destreza el conocerlas, distinguirlas y saberlas lograr, que no ai porfía que baste sin este favor secreto.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
