---
number: 137
slug: the-wise-are-sufficient-unto-themselves
title_en: The wise are suﬃcient unto themselves
title_es: Bástese a sí mismo el sabio
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*The wise are suﬃcient unto themselves.* One of them carried all of his belongings with him.* One friend—a universal man—can represent Rome and the rest of the universe.** Be that friend to your self, and you will be able to live by yourself. Why should you need anyone else if no taste and no understanding is superior to yours? You will depend only on yourself; the greatest happiness is to resemble the Supreme Entity. The person who can live by himself is in no way a brute; in many ways he is a wise man, in every way a god.

---
> *The Greek philosopher Stilpon of Megara, having lost his wife, his children, and all of his possessions in a ﬁre, emerged from the ruins and remarked: “I have all my possessions with me.” Romera-Navarro observes that Gracián had read of this in one of Seneca’s Moral Epistles.
> **An allusion to Cato the Elder, statesman and soldier, praised by Cicero for his capacity for friendship.

## Spanish

*Bástese a sí mismo el sabio*. Él se era todas sus cosas, y llevándose a sí lo llebava todo. Si un amigo universal basta hazer Roma y todo lo restante del Universo, séase uno esse amigo de sí proprio, y podrá vivirse a solas. ¿Quién le podrá hazer falta si no ai ni mayor concepto ni mayor gusto que el suyo? Dependerá de sí solo, que es felicidad suma semejar a la entidad suma. El que puede passar assí a solas, nada tendrá de bruto, sino mucho de sabio y todo de Dios.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
