---
number: 152
slug: dont-keep-company-with-those-who-will-make-you-seem-less
title_en: Don’t keep company with those who will make you seem less gifted
title_es: Nunca acompañarse con quien le pueda desluzir
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*Don’t keep company with those who will make you seem less gifted*, either because they are superior or inferior. The more perfect someone is, the more highly he is esteemed. The other person will always play the leading role, and you a secondary one, and if you win any respect at all, it will come in scraps and remnants. When the moon is alone it competes with the stars, but once the sun comes out it either doesn’t appear or it disappears. Don’t go near the person who can eclipse you, only the one who will make you look better. This is how clever Fabula, from Martial’s poem, was able to look beautiful and radiant among her ugly, unkempt maids. Don’t have a pain in your side, or honor others to the detriment of your own reputation. To grow, associate with the eminent; once grown, with those who are average.

## Spanish

*Nunca acompañarse con quien le pueda desluzir*, tanto por más quanto por menos. Lo que excede en perfección excede en estimación. Hará el otro el primer papel siempre, y él el segundo; y si le alcançare algo de aprecio, serán las sobras de aquel. Campea la Luna, mientras una, entre las Estrellas; pero en saliendo el Sol, o no parece o desaparece. Nunca se arrime a quien le eclipse, sino a quien le realce. Desta suerte pudo parecer hermosa la discreta Fabula de Marcial, y lució entre la fealdad o el desaliño de sus donzellas. Tampoco ha de peligrar de mal de lado, ni honrar a otros a costa de su crédito. Para hazerse, vaya con los eminentes; para hecho, entre los medianos.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
