---
number: 264
slug: dont-have-days-when-you-are-careless
title_en: Don’t have days when you are careless
title_es: No tenga días de descuido
status: draft
themes: []
sources:
  english: english-maurer-doubleday
  spanish: spanish-blanco-catedra
---

## English

*Don’t have days when you are careless.* Sometimes Luck likes to play a practical joke, and it will seize any opportunity to catch you oﬀ guard. Intelligence, prudence, courage, and even wisdom have to be ready for the test. The day they feel most conﬁdent will be the day they are most discredited. Caution is always most lacking when it is most needed. “I never thought of it” is what trips us up and casts us down. Those who observe us carefully use this stratagem, catching our perfections oﬀ guard as they scrutinize and take stock of us. They know the days on which we display our gifts; on those days cunning pays no heed. They choose the day we least expect to put us to the test.

## Spanish

*No tenga días de descuido*. Gusta la suerte de pegar una burla, y atropellará todas las contingencias para coger desapercebido. Siempre han de estar a prueva el ingenio, la cordura y el valor; hasta la belleza, porque el día de su confiança será el de su descrédito. Quando más fue menester el cuidado, faltó siempre, que el no pensar es la çancadilla del perecer. También suele ser estratagema de la agena atención coger al descuido las perfecciones para el riguroso examen del apreciar. Sábense ya los días de la ostentación, y perdónalos la astucia, pero el día que menos se esperava, ésse escoge para la tentativa del valer.

## Commentary

*Draft your commentary here.*
